Spec: Adds Row Lineage (#11130)
apache/iceberg: format/spec.md

* New data types: nanosecond timestamp(tz)
* Default value support for columns
* Multi-argument transforms for partitioning and sorting

> * Row Lineage tracking

Author: I just thought it would be nice to ad to the summary of new features

The set of metadata columns is:

> | Field id, name              | Type          | Description |

Reviewer: Any chance we can avoid unnecessary changes? I usually use a text editor. I believe there are [ways to disable auto-formatting](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/IJPL-92295/Markdown-Add-option-to-disable-smart-tables-introduced-in-IntelliJ-IDEA-2021.3) in IntelliJ as well.

| **`2147483645  _pos`**           | `long`        | Ordinal position of a row in the source data file, starting at `0`                                      |
| **`2147483644  _deleted`**       | `boolean`     | Whether the row has been deleted                                                                        |
| **`2147483643  _spec_id`**       | `int`         | Spec ID used to track the file containing a row                                                         |
| **`2147483642  _partition`**     | `struct`      | Partition to which a row belongs                                                                        |
| **`2147483546  file_path`**      | `string`      | Path of a file, used in position-based delete files                                                     |
| **`2147483545  pos`**            | `long`        | Ordinal position of a row, used in position-based delete files                                          |
| **`2147483544  row`**            | `struct<...>` | Deleted row values, used in position-based delete files                                                 |

> | **`2147483543  _row_id`**        | `long`        | A unique long assigned when row-lineage is enabled see [Row Lineage](#row-lineage)                      |

Author: ```suggestion
| **`2147483540  _row_id`**        | `long`        | A unique long assigned when row-lineage is enabled see [Row Lineage](#row-lineage)                      |
```

> | **`2147483540  _row_id`**        | `long`        | A unique long assigned when row-lineage is enabled see [Row Lineage](#row-lineage)                      |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| **`2147483540  _row_id`**        | `long`        | A unique long assigned when row-lineage is enabled, see [Row Lineage](#row-lineage)                      |
```

> | **`2147483542  _last_updated_seq`**   | `long`        | The sequence number which last updated this row when row-lineage is enabled [Row Lineage](#row-lineage) |

Author: The goal here is to not make it a requirement for engines which are not compatible with row-lineage.

> | **`2147483542  _last_updated_seq`**   | `long`        | The sequence number which last updated this row when row-lineage is enabled [Row Lineage](#row-lineage) |

Reviewer 3: Do we need to engine side changes for the last_updated_seq, or it can be done completely in the iceberg-core layer?

> | **`2147483542  _last_updated_seq`**   | `long`        | The sequence number which last updated this row when row-lineage is enabled [Row Lineage](#row-lineage) |

Author: It's a change in the underlying parquet files so all engines will need to participate.

> | **`2147483542  _last_updated_seq`**   | `long`        | The sequence number which last updated this row when row-lineage is enabled [Row Lineage](#row-lineage) |

Author: ```suggestion
| **`2147483539  _last_updated_seq`**   | `long`        | The sequence number which last updated this row when row-lineage is enabled [Row Lineage](#row-lineage) |
```

> | **`2147483539  _last_updated_seq`**   | `long`        | The sequence number which last updated this row when row-lineage is enabled [Row Lineage](#row-lineage) |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| **`2147483539  _last_updated_seq`**   | `long`        | The sequence number which last updated this row when row-lineage is enabled, see [Row Lineage](#row-lineage) |
```

Reviewer 2: maybe call this `_last_updated_seq_number` or `_last_updated_seqence_number` to be more clear?

### Row Lineage

In v3 and later, an Iceberg table can track row lineage fields for all newly created rows.  Row lineage is enabled by setting the field `row-lineage` to true in the table's metadata. When enabled, engines must maintain the `next-row-id` table field and the following row-level fields when writing data files:

> * `_row_id` a unique long identifier for every row within the table. The value is assigned via inheritance when a row is first added to the table and the existing value is explicitly written when the row is written to a new file.

Reviewer 4: I think I disagree with the "copied" language. When "the row" is written (even if it is modified) the row ID should be preserved. To me, "copied" implies that the row is not modified, opening a question of how to handle row modification.

* `_last_update` the sequence number of the commit that last updated a row. The value is inherited when a row is added or modified and the existing value is explicitly written when the row is written to a different data file but not modified.

> These fields are assigned and updated by inheritance because the commit sequence number and starting row ID are not assigned until the snapshot is successfully committed. Inheritance is used to allow writing data and manifest files before values are known so that it is not necessary to rewrite data and manifest files when an optimistic commit is retried.

Reviewer 4: The manifest list is always rewritten on retry. That's why we can assign sequence numbers (and now row ID ranges) in it.

When row lineage is enabled, new snapshots cannot include [Equality Deletes](#equality-delete-files). Row lineage is incompatible with equality deletes because lineage values must be maintained, but equality deletes are used to avoid reading existing data before writing changes.

#### Row lineage assignment

> Row lineage fields are written when row lineage is enabled. When not enabled, row lineage fields (`_row_id` and `_last_update`) must not be written to data files. The rest of this section applies when row lineage is enabled.

Reviewer 5: The same clean-up question here. Do we rewrite data files in case of disabling row lineage or we disallow disabling?

Author: I think disabling is allowed it just means we stop changing any of the metadata and lineage information may be possibly lost by clients which don't support row-lineage. I don't think we need to prevent this.

When a row is added or modified, the `_last_updated_sequence_number` field is set to `null` so that it is inherited when reading. Similarly, the `_row_id` field for an added row is set to `null` and assigned when reading.

> A data file with only new rows for the table may omit the `_last_updated_sequence_number` and `_row_id`. When reading, such files must set both columns to null for all rows.

Reviewer: If we allow writers to skip these fields in new data files, does it mean we loose the ability to check if this data file was added prior to enabling row lineage? Do we even care about that?

Reviewer: Probably not, we still have `first_row_id` on the data file. Never mind.

> A data file with only new rows for the table may omit the `_last_updated_sequence_number` and `_row_id`. When reading, such files must set both columns to null for all rows.

Reviewer: `such files must set both column` -> shouldn't this be the reader's responsibility?

Author: Yes, let me reword that

> A data file with only new rows for the table may omit the `_last_updated_sequence_number` and `_row_id`. If the columns are missing, readers should treat both columns as if they exist and are set to null for all rows.

Reviewer 4: There are no reserved column _names_, only _IDs_. And this does update the table of reserved IDs.

> When `null`, a row's `_row_id` field is assigned to the `start_row_id` from its containing data file plus the row position in that data file (`_pos`). A data file's `start_row_id` field is assigned using inheritance and is documented in [First Row ID Inheritance](#first-row-id-inheritance). A manifest's `start_row_id` is assigned when writing the manifest list for a snapshot and is documented in [First Row ID Assignment](#first-row-id-assignment). A snapshot's `start-row-id` is to the table's `next-row-id` and is documented in [Snapshot Row IDs](#snapshot-row-ids).

Author: Changed everything to first

When `null`, a row's `_row_id` field is assigned to the `first_row_id` from its containing data file plus the row position in that data file (`_pos`). A data file's `first_row_id` field is assigned using inheritance and is documented in [First Row ID Inheritance](#first-row-id-inheritance). A manifest's `first_row_id` is assigned when writing the manifest list for a snapshot and is documented in [First Row ID Assignment](#first-row-id-assignment). A snapshot's `first-row-id` is set to the table's `next-row-id` and is documented in [Snapshot Row IDs](#snapshot-row-ids).

Values for `_row_id` and `_last_updated_sequence_number` are either read from the data file or assigned at read time. As a result on read, rows in a table always have non-null values for these fields when lineage is enabled.

> When an existing row is moved to a different data file for any reason, writers are required to write `_row_id` and `_last_updated_sequence_number` according to the following rules:

Reviewer 4: Yes. `INSERT OVERWRITE` is an `INSERT` and the rows should be treated as new rows.

I know there are patterns here where users have historically built patterns around `INSERT OVERWRITE` when `MERGE` was not available. For example, the read-union-overwrite pattern was heavily used at Netflix to add new data to existing partitions. The problem is that engines can't detect the intent and carry row information through. These patterns also can't be optimized by engines, so I think the best choice is to use the `INSERT` semantics here.

1. The row's existing non-null `_row_id` must be copied into the new data file

> 2. If the write has modified the row, the `_last_updated_seq` field must be set to `null` (so that the modification's sequence number replaces the current value)

Reviewer 6: @RussellSpitzer this is the part I am not following. is this for UPDATE queries?

```
UPDATE prod.db.table
SET c1 = 'update_c1', c2 = 'update_c2'
WHERE user_id = 'uid1`
```

Author: Yes any UPDATE or MERGE queries

Files `data2` and `data3` are written with `null` for `first_row_id` and are assigned `first_row_id` at read time based on the manifest's `first_row_id` and the `record_count` of previously listed ADDED files in this manifest: (1,000 + 0) and (1,000 + 50).

When the new snapshot is committed, the table's `next-row-id` must also be updated (even if the new snapshot is not in the main branch). Because 225 rows were added (`added1`: 100 + `added2`: 0 + `added3`: 125), the new value is 1,000 + 225 = 1,225:

### Enabling Row Lineage for Non-empty Tables

Any snapshot without the field `first-row-id` does not have any lineage information and values for `_row_id` and `_last_updated_sequence_number` cannot be assigned accurately.  

All files that were added before `row-lineage` was enabled should propagate null for all of the `row-lineage` related
fields. The values for `_row_id` and `_last_updated_sequence_number` should always return null and when these rows are copied, 
null should be explicitly written. After this point, rows are treated as if they were just created 

> and assigned `row_id` and `_last_updated_sequence_number` as if they were new rows.

Reviewer 3: For completeness, should we add line on expected behavior if disabling row lineage after enabling it for some time.

Reviewer 5: Should we call that out in the spec? I know it is merged already. May be a followup PR?

These fields are assigned and updated by inheritance because the commit sequence number and starting row ID are not assigned until the snapshot is successfully committed. Inheritance is used to allow writing data and manifest files before values are known so that it is not necessary to rewrite data and manifest files when an optimistic commit is retried.

When row lineage is enabled, new snapshots cannot include [Equality Deletes](#equality-delete-files). Row lineage is incompatible with equality deletes because lineage values must be maintained, but equality deletes are used to avoid reading existing data before writing changes.

#### Row lineage assignment

Row lineage fields are written when row lineage is enabled. When not enabled, row lineage fields (`_row_id` and `_last_updated_seq`) must not be written to data files. The rest of this section applies when row lineage is enabled.

When a row is added or modified, the `_last_updated_seq` field is set to `null` so that it is inherited when reading. Similarly, the `_row_id` field for an added row is set to `null` and assigned when reading.

> A data file with only new rows for the table may omit the `_last_updated_seq` and `_row_id`. Files read without must be treated as if both fields are null for all rows.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A data file with only new rows for the table may omit the `_last_updated_seq` and `_row_id`. When reading, such files must set both columns to null for all rows.
```

Reviewer 4: I thought that "File read without" was a bit awkward because the object is implied.

On read, if `_last_updated_seq` is `null` it is assigned the `sequence_number` of the data file's manifest entry. The data sequence number of a data file is documented in [Sequence Number Inheritance](#sequence-number-inheritance).

> When `null`, a row's `_row_id` field is assigned to the `first_row_id` from its containing data file plus the row position in that data file (`_pos`). A data file's `first_row_id` field is assigned using inheritance and is documented in [First Row ID Inheritance](#first-row-id-inheritance). A manifest's `first_row_id` is assigned when writing the manifest list for a snapshot and is documented in [First Row ID Assignment](#first-row-id-assignment). A snapshot's `first-row-id` is to the table's `next-row-id` and is documented in [Snapshot Row IDs](#snapshot-row-ids).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When `null`, a row's `_row_id` field is assigned to the `first_row_id` from its containing data file plus the row position in that data file (`_pos`). A data file's `first_row_id` field is assigned using inheritance and is documented in [First Row ID Inheritance](#first-row-id-inheritance). A manifest's `first_row_id` is assigned when writing the manifest list for a snapshot and is documented in [First Row ID Assignment](#first-row-id-assignment). A snapshot's `first-row-id` is set to the table's `next-row-id` and is documented in [Snapshot Row IDs](#snapshot-row-ids).
```

Reviewer 4: Looks like a typo.

```json
{
  "operation": "append",
  "first-row-id": 1000,
  ...
}
```

The snapshot's manifest list would contain existing manifests, plus new manifests with an assigned `first_row_id` based on the `added_rows_count` of previously listed added manifests:

| `manifest_path` | `added_rows_count` | `existing_rows_count` | `first_row_id`     |
|-----------------|--------------------|-----------------------|--------------------|
| ...             | ...                | ...                   | ...                |
| existing        | 75                 | 0                     | 925                |
| added1          | 100                | 25                    | 1000               |
| added2          | 0                  | 100                   | 1100               |
| added3          | 125                | 25                    | 1100               |

The first added file, `added1`, is assigned the same `first_row_id` as the snapshot and the following manifests are assigned `first_row_id` based on the number of rows added by the previously listed manifests. The second file, `added2`, does not change the `first_row_id` of the next manifest because it contains no added data files.

> Within the first `added`, the first added manifest, each data file' `first_row_id` follows a similar pattern:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Within the first `added1`, the first added manifest, each data file's `first_row_id` follows a similar pattern:
```

Author: Removed "the first" as well to remove that redundancy

| `status` | `file_path` | `record_count` | `first_row_id` |
|----------|-------------|----------------|----------------|
| EXISTING | data1       | 75             | 800            |
| ADDED    | data2       | 50             | null (1000)    |
| ADDED    | data3       | 50             | null (1050)    |

The `first_row_id` of the EXISTING file `data1` was already assigned, so the file metadata was copied into manifest `added1`.

Files `data2` and `data3` are written with `null` for `first_row_id` and are assigned `first_row_id` at read time based on the manifest's `first_row_id` and the `record_count` of previously listed ADDED files in this manifest: (1,000 + 0) and (1,000 + 50).

> When the new snapshot is committed, the table's `next-row-id` must also be updated (even if the new snapshot is not in the main branch). Because 225 rows were added (`added1`: 100 + `added2`: 0 + `added3`: 125), the new value is 1,000 + 225 = 1,225:

Reviewer 4: +1 for the example with each manifest file's contribution called out.

### Enabling Row Lineage for Non-empty Tables

> Any snapshot without the field `next-row-id` does not have any lineage information and values for `_row_id`

Reviewer 4: `next-row-id` is table metadata, so I think that this is referring to the snapshot's `first-row-id`.

| **`2147483642  _partition`**      | `struct`      | Partition to which a row belongs                                              |
| **`2147483546  file_path`**       | `string`      | Path of a file, used in position-based delete files                           |
| **`2147483545  pos`**             | `long`        | Ordinal position of a row, used in position-based delete files                |
| **`2147483544  row`**             | `struct<...>` | Deleted row values, used in position-based delete files                       |
| **`2147483545  _row_identifier`** | `long`        | A unique long assigned when row-lineage is enabled see [Row Lineage](#row-lineage) |
| **`2147483545  _last_update`**    | `long`        | The sequence number which last updated this row when row-lineage is enabled [Row Lineage](#row-lineage)  |

### Row Lineage

In Specification V3, an Iceberg Table can declare that engines must track row-lineage of all newly created rows. This
requirement is controlled by setting the field `row-lineage` to true in the table's metadata. When true, two additional 
fields in data files will be available for all rows added to the table.

> * `_row_identifier` a unique long for every row. Computed via inheritance for rows in their original datafiles 

Author: One possible alternative from the doc was to have this be a combination of a random prefix and integer to remove the requirement of monotonic integer from the metadata. Since we have other monotonic integers in the metadata, I think this may not be that helpful unless we do a broad change.

Author: The problem with having a UUID alone, is that we can't track row origins. We would need to use some bits to identify the origin snapshot/sequence id of the row as well which would involve us either using two columns or some custom representation. The current approach uses sequence number approach and can be coupled with the "first_***" columns to determine which snapshot the row was added in.

| data_3      | 150            | null (1100)             |

Two newly added files, data_1 and data_3, have `first_used_identifier` set to null. This allows writers to add new
data files to inherit the values for the total number of added rows from other data_files as well as the snapshot's
`first_used_identifier`. When reading the `first_used_identifier` column, the value of `first_used_identifier` from the 
manifest  entry is combined with the sum of `record_count` for all previous `data_file` structs that were added in the 
manifest.

The existing file, data_2, came from a previous table state (not included in this example) and has it's inherited value
for `first_used_identifier` written out explicitly into the `data_file` struct since it can no longer be computed in 
the context of the current manifest-list.

Finally, the new table metadata must update `last-used-identifier` to the new highest possible value. In this example, 
the last largest value for `first_used_identifier` in the manifest-list plus the `added_rows_count` for that manifest 
(path_4), 1475 + 125  = 1600.

```json
{
  "last-used-identifier": 1600
}
```

#### Datafile Propagation

> New data files added when `row-lineage` is enabled do not require any modification. The columns for `_row_identifiier`

Author: As Recommended on the proposal, we don't actually need to include the columns on new files.

Reviewer 4: What about existing rows that are added to these files? I don't think this quite works unless all of the rows are new and get new IDs.

Author: Yes, sorry this is explicitly for files which are completely new to the table. I'll add a note in the next commit

and `_last_updated` do not need to be present in the file, but if they are present they must be `null` for all rows in
the file.

Adding new file to the table where fields `_row_identifier` and `_last_updated` are set to non-null values is forbidden.

> When read, any null value for `_row_identifier` is computed by adding the `first_used_identifier` of the parent manifest

Reviewer 6: > by adding the `first_used_identifier` of the parent manifest to the row's `_pos` 

Is this correct? I thought it should be `first_used_identifier + sum of rows of data files before this + _pos`?

Author: Ah yes, it should have said parent manifest datafile entry. That's a little complicated though so let me see if I can clarify that

The set of metadata columns is:

| Field id, name              | Type          | Description |
|-----------------------------|---------------|-------------|
| **`2147483646  _file`**     | `string`      | Path of the file in which a row is stored |
| **`2147483645  _pos`**      | `long`        | Ordinal position of a row in the source data file |
| **`2147483644  _deleted`**  | `boolean`     | Whether the row has been deleted |
| **`2147483643  _spec_id`**  | `int`         | Spec ID used to track the file containing a row |
| **`2147483642  _partition`** | `struct`     | Partition to which a row belongs |
| **`2147483546  file_path`** | `string`      | Path of a file, used in position-based delete files |
| **`2147483545  pos`**       | `long`        | Ordinal position of a row, used in position-based delete files |

> | **`2147483544  row`**       | `struct<...>` | Deleted row values, used in position-based delete files |

Author: Intellij did this automatically and now I can't undo it easily :(

| **`2147483543  _row_id`**        | `long`        | A unique long assigned when row-lineage is enabled see [Row Lineage](#row-lineage)                      |

> | **`2147483542  _last_update`**   | `long`        | The sequence number which last updated this row when row-lineage is enabled [Row Lineage](#row-lineage) |

Reviewer 4: I'd typically use past tense (i.e., "updated" to match "deleted") and have a qualifier to signal what the value means. What about `_last_updated_seq`?

> ### Row Lineage

Reviewer 6: If I understand this correctly, the purpose is to keep the same `_row_id` during file rewrites like compaction, sorting.  should we just call this `Row Identifier`? `Lineage` typically means changes/updates on the rows with primary key (as defined by `Identifier fields`).

Author: the row id is used for lineage purposes (an automatic artificial primary key)

> ### Row Lineage

Reviewer 7: (I’m not sure if the lineage proposal document is still active for discussion, hence posting this comment here. If it is preferred, I can move this discussion there.)

The term row lineage has limited scope -- it refers to a "sequence number" which indicates when a row was created or modified. However, it does not reference the source of a modified row. I.e. it does not provide details about evolution of a row (the original row which was modified). Is this definition of "evolution" sufficient?

Also, the proposal document mentions that the impact on reads should be minimal. If there are any available metrics, specially increase in data file size, it might be beneficial to include them in this document so that users can understand the impact of enabling this feature.

Author: Every "row_id" can be used to track the creation of a row by checking the "row_id" high water mark of each snapshot in the table history. This allows a user (with sufficent snapshot history) to determine when any particular row was initially added to the table. The second field `last-updated-seq` points to the update in which the row was last modified. 

Together these allow you determine when a row was made and when it was last changed.  The origin of a modified row is always the row with the exact same `_row_id` in the commit before `last-updated-seq`.

Impact on read should be 0 since these columns do not need to actually be materialized by scans. Impact on merge statements/copy statements should be slightly increased because more data has to go through the compute engine although this will differ in efficiency based on the engine.

On file size this should be relatively low impact but we can do some benchmarks once the reference implementation is done. For use cases without row-level-updates it would be very very cheap since any materialized `row_id` and `last-updated-sequence` values should be either very very similar (and compressible) or identical.

In Specification V3, an Iceberg Table can declare that engines must track row-lineage of all newly created rows. This
requirement is controlled by setting the field `row-lineage` to true in the table's metadata. When true, two additional 

> fields in data files will be available for all rows added to the table.

Reviewer 4: Rather than "will be available" what about "must be maintained"? I think that's more clear to signal that there is a writer requirement.

> fields in data files will be available for all rows added to the table.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
fields in data files will be available for all rows added to the table:
```

* `_row_id` a unique long for every row. Computed via inheritance for rows in their original datafiles 
and explicitly written when the row is moved to a new file.
* `_last_update` the sequence number of the commit which last updated this row. The value is computed via inheritance for 
rows in their original file or in files where the row was modified.

> Commits with `row-lineage` enabled are not allowed to include any [Equality Deletes](#equality-delete-files).

Reviewer 4: It may be good to give more context for why this is a requirement, like "This is because the row lineage columns are required to be preserved for a given row, but equality deletes are intended to enable use cases in which existing rows are not read before writing."

Implementations writing to tables where `row-lineage` is enabled must populate several additional 

> fields in the metadata and propagate row information from existing and updated. 

Reviewer 4: Rather than "the metadata" it would be good to call out specifically which files have requirements.

> #### Metadata Propagation

Reviewer 4: "Row lineage metadata propagation"?

Creating a new commit when `row-lineage` is enabled requires
* Setting the new snapshot's `first-row-id` field to the previous table metadata's `last-row-id` field
* Setting `first_row_id` in new data manifest entries in the new manifest list to `first-row-id` field 
from the snapshot plus the sum of all `added_rows_count` in previously listed new data manifest entries.
* Setting `first_row_id` in new `data_file` entries  to null and in existing `data_file` structs to their original
or computed value (if previously null) of `first_row_id`

> * Incrementing the new metadata's `last-row-id` field by the number of new rows added to the table by the commit.

Reviewer 4: I think this requirement makes it much harder to implement row lineage because we need to keep track of the number of null values for `_row_id` when writing a data file. Wouldn't it be easier to use `record_count`, which is already a required field?

When reading a `data_file` manifest entry with a null `first_row_id`, the value is calculated as the 

> sum of the `total_records` of every previous added `data_file` entry summed with the`first_row_id` of the manifest. 

Reviewer 4: I think this conflicts with the requirement above, which states that the `last-row-id` is incremented by the number of new rows. I'm assuming that by `total_records` you mean the data file's `record_count` (which is what I suggested using above). If that's the case, then the `first_row_id` of a data file could exceed the `last-row-id` of the commit.

For example, if a commit rewrites two data files, A and B (each 100 rows), and adds just one new row to the resulting A2 and B2 files (each 101 rows), then `last-row-id` would be `previous-last-row-id + 2`. But the `start_row_id` of file B would be `previous-last-row-id + 101 (A2#record_count)`.

The column metrics maps are used when filtering to select both data and delete files. For delete files, the metrics must store bounds and counts for all deleted rows, or must be omitted. Storing metrics for deleted rows ensures that the values can be used during job planning to find delete files that must be merged during a scan.

> 

Reviewer 2: nit: unrelated change?

| _optional_ | _optional_ | _optional_ | **`132  split_offsets`**          | `list<133: long>`            | Split offsets for the data file. For example, all row group offsets in a Parquet file. Must be sorted ascending                                                                                                    |
|            | _optional_ | _optional_ | **`135  equality_ids`**           | `list<136: int>`             | Field ids used to determine row equality in equality delete files. Required when `content=2` and should be null otherwise. Fields with ids listed in this column must be present in the delete file                |
| _optional_ | _optional_ | _optional_ | **`140  sort_order_id`**          | `int`                        | ID representing sort order for this file [3].                                                                                                                                                                      |

> |            |            | _optional_ | **`141  first_used_identifier`**   | `long`                       | The value of `row_identifier` for the first row in the data file. See [ref row lineage]                                                                                                                            |

Reviewer 6: `first_used_identifier` doesn't capture the `row` part. Here are a couple alternatives to consider: `first_row_id` or `row_id_start_pos`. Shortening the identifier as `id`?

`[ref row lineage]` can be fixed now as `[row lineage](#row-lineage)`

Author: thanks I missed that one

| _optional_ | _optional_ | _optional_ | **`132  split_offsets`**          | `list<133: long>`                                                           | Split offsets for the data file. For example, all row group offsets in a Parquet file. Must be sorted ascending                                                                                                    |
|            | _optional_ | _optional_ | **`135  equality_ids`**           | `list<136: int>`                                                            | Field ids used to determine row equality in equality delete files. Required when `content=2` and should be null otherwise. Fields with ids listed in this column must be present in the delete file                |
| _optional_ | _optional_ | _optional_ | **`140  sort_order_id`**          | `int`                                                                       | ID representing sort order for this file [3].                                                                                                                                                                      |

> |            |            | _optional_ | **`141  first_row_id`**  | `long`                                                                      | The value of `row_id` for the first row in the data file. See [Row Lineage](#row-lineage)                                                                                                                 |

Reviewer 4: There's a note below that 141 is reserved. We should probably assign 142 instead.

| _required_ | _required_ | _required_ | **`timestamp-ms`**           | A timestamp when the snapshot was created, used for garbage collection and table inspection                                        |
| _optional_ | _required_ | _required_ | **`manifest-list`**          | The location of a manifest list for this snapshot that tracks manifest files with additional metadata                              |
| _optional_ |            |            | **`manifests`**              | A list of manifest file locations. Must be omitted if `manifest-list` is present                                                   |
| _optional_ | _required_ | _required_ | **`summary`**                | A string map that summarizes the snapshot changes, including `operation` (see below)                                               |
| _optional_ | _optional_ | _optional_ | **`schema-id`**              | ID of the table's current schema when the snapshot was created                                                                     |

> |            |            | _optional_ | **`first-row-id`**  | The first `_row_id` assigned to the first row in the first datafile in the first manifest, see [Row Lineage](#row-lineage) |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
|            |            | _optional_ | **`first-row-id`**           | The first `_row_id` assigned to the first row in the first datafile in the first manifest, see [Row Lineage](#row-lineage) |
```

1. Lower and upper bounds are serialized to bytes using the single-object serialization in Appendix D. The type of used to encode the value is the type of the partition field data.
2. If -0.0 is a value of the partition field, the `lower_bound` must not be +0.0, and if +0.0 is a value of the partition field, the `upper_bound` must not be -0.0.

#### First Row ID Assignment

> Row ID inheritance is used when row lineage is enabled. When not enabled, a manifest's `first_row_id` must always be set to `null`. The rest of this section applies when row lineage is enabled.

Author: @rdblue also has some thoughts on this. I don't have a problem with enabling and disabling and having slightly odd behavior when that happens. I think it's a pretty unlikely situation to have it flip back and forth, for users who do that they can expect some odd events.

> Row ID inheritance is used when row lineage is enabled. When not enabled, a manifest's `first_row_id` must always be set to `null`. The rest of this section applies when row lineage is enabled.

Reviewer 4: I don't think that we should allow disabling it. That would create strange situations and we would not be able to trust the metadata. There may be a way to handle this, but I don't want to block the initial feature taking the time to design it.

> Row ID inheritance is used when row lineage is enabled. When not enabled, a manifest's `first_row_id` must always be set to `null`. The rest of this section applies when row lineage is enabled.

Author: I would assume we would treat any commits in the gap the same as we would treat writes before tracking was on.

> Row ID inheritance is used when row lineage is enabled. When not enabled, a manifest's `first_row_id` must always be set to `null`. The rest of this section applies when row lineage is enabled.

Reviewer 8: A related question: if we revert the table to a snapshot before enabling the row lineage, should we disable row lineage? If not, what about `next_row_id`?

> Row ID inheritance is used when row lineage is enabled. When not enabled, a manifest's `first_row_id` must always be set to `null`. The rest of this section applies when row lineage is enabled.

Reviewer 5: Can we be more explicit in the spec about disabling row lineage is not allowed at this moment? I think the engine/catalog should guide it so that users won't accidentally disable it.

> Row ID inheritance is used when row lineage is enabled. When not enabled, a manifest's `first_row_id` must always be set to `null`. The rest of this section applies when row lineage is enabled.

Author: A table snapshot reversion is the same as resetting current-snapshot. In this case we don't change next_row_id and we would not disable row_lineage. Turning on `row_lineage` is not a snapshot operation. I'll write that explicitly.

| _optional_ | _optional_ | _optional_ | **`partition-statistics`**  | A list (optional) of [partition statistics](#partition-statistics).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
|            |            | _optional_ | **`row-lineage`**           | A boolean, defaulting to false, setting whether or not to track the creation and updates to rows in the table. See [Row Lineage](#row-lineage).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |

> |            |            | _optional_ | **`next-row-id`**           | A value higher than all assigned row IDs; the next snapshot `first-row-id`. See [Row Lineage](#row-lineage).                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |

Reviewer 2: I feel like the description is missing some words. Did you maybe mean to say "the next snapshot's `first-row-id`"?

Author: That seems better

| _optional_ | _required_ | _required_ | **`sort-orders`**           | A list of sort orders, stored as full sort order objects.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| _optional_ | _required_ | _required_ | **`default-sort-order-id`** | Default sort order id of the table. Note that this could be used by writers, but is not used when reading because reads use the specs stored in manifest files.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |

> |            | _optional_ | _optional_ | **`refs`**                  | A map of snapshot references. The map keys are the unique snapshot reference names in the table, and the map values are snapshot reference objects. There is always a `main` branch reference pointing to the `current-snapshot-id` even if the `refs` map is null.                                                                                                                              |

Reviewer 4: Not related to this PR, but a general v3 question: Should we make `refs` required in v3?

@aokolnychyi, @danielcweeks, @jackye1995, @RussellSpitzer, @flyrain, what do you think?

Author: I don't think there are any negatives to that. What was the reason it wasn't required in V3?

| _optional_ | _optional_ | _optional_ | **`partition-statistics`**  | A list (optional) of [partition statistics](#partition-statistics).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
|            |            | _optional_ | **`row-lineage`**           | A boolean, defaulting to false, setting whether or not to track the creation and updates to rows in the table. See [Row Lineage](#row-lineage).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |

> |            |            | _optional_ | **`next-row-id`**  | A value higher than all assigned row IDs; the next snapshot `first-row-id`. See [Row Lineage](#row-lineage).                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
|            |            | _optional_ | **`next-row-id`**           | A value higher than all assigned row IDs; the next snapshot `first-row-id`. See [Row Lineage](#row-lineage).                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
```

For serialization details, see Appendix C.

> When a new snapshot is added the table's `next-row-id` should be updated to the previous `next-row-id` plus the sum of `record_count` for all data files added in the snapshot (this is also equal to the sum of `added_rows_count` for all manifests added in the snapshot). This ensures that `next-row-id` is always higher than any assigned row ID in the table.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When a new snapshot is added, the table's `next-row-id` should be updated to the previous `next-row-id` plus the sum of `record_count` for all data files added in the snapshot (this is also equal to the sum of `added_rows_count` for all manifests added in the snapshot). This ensures that `next-row-id` is always higher than any assigned row ID in the table.
```

| _optional_ | _optional_ | _optional_ | **`partition-statistics`**  | A list (optional) of [partition statistics](#partition-statistics).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
|            |            | _optional_ | **`row-lineage`**           | A boolean, defaulting to false, setting whether or not to track the creation and updates to rows in the table. See [Row Lineage](#row-lineage).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |

> |            |            | _optional_ | **`last-used-idenfitier`**  | The table's highest used value for `_row_identifier`, a monotonically increasing long that tracks every unique row added to the table. See [Row Lineage](#row-lineage).                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |

Reviewer 6: similarly, `last-used-row-id`?
